today is an occasion for us
to pay a visit to a
once again renewed popular idea called
modern monetary theory
the person whose name is most on it
stephanie kelton was an advisor to
bernie sanders campaign
four years ago um alexandria
ocasio-cortez many of the new
progressives on the left have
associated themselves with her her ideas
her publications and this theory
so i think it is fair to say that it is
a theory that
it resides and is frankly gaining
popularity
on the progressive left yeah not all
economists think the national debt is
something we should worry about
one of them is stephanie kelton she's a
professor of economics and public policy
at stony brook university i'm the former
chief economist on the u.s
senate budget committee for the
democratic staff
and i'm the author of a new york times
bestseller the deficit myth that book
has a lot of interesting ideas about
government debt
the last thing that she says about taxes
specifically before i move on to the
rest of the book is that she says the
purpose for taxes the main purpose the
biggest one
is to create a demand for the currency
she gives an example of a dad who wants
his kid to do chores and so he says i'll
give you these
these dad coupons and they said we don't
want those dad coupons and he says okay
well at the end of every week you owe me
30 dad coupons or else you know you're
in you know you're grounded and so
in order to create a demand for those
dad coupons which are really worthless
to him
he says well you owe them to me or else
there will be a punishment and so all of
a sudden
now they have to go and do all these
tours in order to you know get these
accumulate these dad coupons so that at
the end of the week they can pay some of
them back to him and ultimately he
doesn't care what they are he could
destroy them he doesn't need them
he made them up he printed them and so
she says this is exactly what the
government does
the government just you know they have
to include taxes in the system in order
to create a demand
for the currency if you don't turn in a
certain number of their
fake printed money at the end of the
year you go to jail
we should put modern in quotation marks
because it's a very
old idea thousands of years old
if the truth be told but once again it
is being presented as new
and it is this it is the idea that
governments can spend as much as they
want
to pay for it they simply print the cash
they create the money because of course
the bank which they own
in our case the bank of canada has a
monopoly on the creation of that
currency so
why not just create more money in order
to spend it if the state wishes to spend
more
it can do so only by bottling your
savings
or by taxing you more and it's no good
thinking that someone else will pay
that someone else is you there is no
such thing as public money
there is only taxpayers money can i ask
you about another
policy and sort of fixation of
economists right now
modern monetary theory yeah can you just
in shorthand describe it for our viewers
no okay i cannot describe
reviews because it makes no sense no one
no when you try to
talk to the mmt people you say so this
is what you're saying they say no you
just don't get it
the only limit on the amount that can be
spent is when
said money creation leads to inflation
at which point modern monetary theorists
say the solution is to simply raise
taxes in order to
reduce the demand that was driving up
the inflation
in the first place now all this sounds
magical you know creating something from
nothing
but as it has been said there is nothing
new
except what is forgotten i quote
reinhart and rogoff two harvard
professors that have studied 800 years
of
debt crises and they say and i quote
early on across the world as already
noted
the main device for defaulting on
government obligations was that of
debasing the content of the coinage
modern currency presses are just a
technologically advanced
and efficient approach to achieving the
same
end so you sort of dismiss them as as
for being
you know cranks on the far left yeah
well no no i'm not even sure it's on the
far left it's not at all clear
that an mmp perspective whatever that is
because they're very hard to decipher
the content is not actually a special
leftist not more so than conventional
keynesian view
in the uh uh if anything that's about to
get too technically here but if anything
i would say that conventional painting
view gives you more room
for deficit spending than mmp does i
think
that people we could look at what
republicans have done
both with the tax cuts and with the 300
billion or so in spending and say
they seem to kind of get mt when
governments print money
they drive up the price of two things
one the things that the rich own
and two the things that everyone else
buys so if you are a millionaire mansion
owner
you're getting extremely rich your house
is making
a lot more money than you are you're
sitting in your rocking chair
and cash is just falling out of your
attic on your head
but if you are a working class person
who rents
in order to have a roof a roof overhead
your rent is going up your food is going
up your gas is going up
everything you buy is going up except
your wages are not
and guess what that dream of owning a
house
it's getting further and further away
deficits do
matter but they don't matter in the ways
that we've been
conventionally thinking about them and
the way we usually think about a deficit
is
that it's evidence of excessive spending
and that's just wrong i'm
not worried about the 22 trillion in
debt because all the national debt is
is a historical record of all of the
dollars that the government spent into
the economy and didn't tax back
that people are currently saving in the
form of u.s treasuries
i'm not worried about 22 trillion in u.s
assets being held in portfolios and
pensions and so forth although what if
interest rates
mean what i'm worried about getting a
little short on time steph the only
reason i'm jumping in is
so if interest rates go right now
they're very low which means the the
borrowing cost or the deficit right now
is very low and for the debt that you
mentioned so if interest rates go up a
little bit
how do you propose to pay for that do
you continue to just expand the money
supply
the honourable member for kingston and
the island i just want to know amanda
figure if there's going to be a test
on this history lesson afterwards uh and
uh if i should be expecting that to come
when the member is done
partly point of order the honorable
member for carlton
well the test has been running for four
years now and they've been getting an f
year after year after year
my sling is editorial explicit material
briefcase show live and stereo flow fill
me